.TH WSTUDIO 1 "2026-07-20" "wstudio 1.0.0-beta.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
wstudio \- keyboard-centric digital audio workstation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wstudio
.RI [ path ]
.br
.B wstudio
.B \-\-tui
.RI [ path ]
.br
.B wstudio
.B \-\-gui
.RI [ path ]
.br
.B wstudio
.B render
.br
.B wstudio
.RB { \-v | \-\-version }
.br
.B wstudio
.RB { \-h | \-\-help }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wstudio
is a digital audio workstation for the terminal and as a native GUI.
It borrows vim's modal editing model instead of a mouse-first workflow:
.B normal
mode navigates the project and drives the transport,
.B insert
turns the keyboard into a piano,
.B visual
selects and yanks ranges, and
.B command
mode runs
.B :
commands. It ships with synths, samplers, a drum machine, a
sample-chopping slicer, and a full effects rack (gate, compression, EQ,
saturation, bitcrush, chorus, phaser, delay, reverb) built in.
.PP
With no arguments,
.B wstudio
launches on a blank project using the frontend selected by
.I wstudio.o.preferred_frontend
in the user's Lua configuration (default: the terminal frontend). Pass a
path to a
.I .wsj
project file to open it instead of starting blank.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.RI [ path ]
Open the given
.I .wsj
project file instead of starting on a blank project.
.TP
.B \-\-tui
Force the terminal frontend for this run, overriding
.IR wstudio.o.preferred_frontend .
Errors if the terminal frontend was disabled at build time.
.TP
.B \-\-gui
Force the native GUI frontend for this run, overriding
.IR wstudio.o.preferred_frontend .
Errors if the GUI frontend was disabled at build time.
.TP
.B render
Render a built-in demo melody through a synth, compressor, delay, and
reverb to
.I out.wav
in the current directory, then exit. Does not open a frontend; useful for
sanity-checking the audio pipeline.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B wstudio
is scripted with Lua: options, keymaps, custom
.B :
commands, and autocmds. On first run it writes a fully documented
template to the user configuration file below. A broken configuration is
reported but never blocks startup.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/wstudio/init.lua
.RI ( ~/.config/wstudio/init.lua " when " XDG_CONFIG_HOME " is unset)
Per-user Lua configuration, generated on first run if missing.
.TP
.I /etc/xdg/wstudio/init.lua
Optional system-wide Lua configuration, read before the user
configuration. On NixOS this is written by the
.I programs.wstudio
module.
.TP
.I *.wsj
wstudio project files, passed as the optional
.I path
argument.
.SH SEE ALSO
The Lua configuration API and file format history ship with the source
distribution under
.IR docs/lua-api.md " and " FORMAT.md .
